add release notes for v7.3.0 (#14296)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-7.3.0.md

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2023

TiDB version: 7.3.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.3.0#version-list)

7.3.0 introduces the following major feature as generally available. The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>

>     <td>Scalability and Performance</td>
>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-raft-kv#partitioned-raft-kv">Partitioned Raft KV GA.</a></td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td>Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-raft-kv#partitioned-raft-kv">Partitioned Raft KV GA</a></td>
```

>     <td rowspan="2">Scalability and Performance</td>
>     <td>Partitioned Raft KV GA.<a href=https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-raft-kv#partitioned-raft-kv"> Learn more</a>. </td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td>Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/partitioned-raft-kv#partitioned-raft-kv">Partitioned Raft KV GA.</a></td>
```

    Before v7.3.0, the MPP engine of TiFlash cannot execute queries that contain CTEs by default. To achieve the best execution performance within the MPP framework, you need to use the system variable [`tidb_opt_force_inline_cte`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_force_inline_cte-introduced-since-v630) to inline expand CTE.

    Starting from v7.3.0, TiFlash's MPP engine supports executing queries with CTEs without inline expanding them, allowing for optimal query execution within the MPP framework. In TPC-DS benchmark tests, compared to using inline expansion, this feature has shown a 20% improvement in overall query execution speed for queries containing CTE.

    This feature is an experimental feature and is disabled by default. It is controlled by the system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution-new-in-v720).

### Reliability

* Add new optimizer hints [#45520](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45520) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1457-->

    In v7.3.0, TiDB introduces several new optimizer hints to control the join methods between tables, including:

>     - [`INDEX_JOIN()`](link) selects index nested loop join, which uses indexes to filter and use the result set as the inner table to join.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`INDEX_JOIN()`](link) selects index nested loop join, which uses indexes to filter and uses the filter result as the inner table to join.
```

>     - [`NO_HASH_JOIN()`](link) selects join methods other than hash join.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`NO_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than hash join.
```

    - [`NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()`](link) selects join methods other than [index nested loop join](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join).

    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/optimizer-hints).

> * Manually mark queries that use resources more than expected (experimental) [#43691](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43691) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1446-->
> 
>     In v7.2.0, TiDB automatically manages runaway queries, where queries that take longer than expected can be automatically demoted or canceled. In practice, it is not possible to cover all cases by relying on rules alone. Therefore, in v7.3.0, TiDB adds the ability to manually mark queries. With the new command [`QUERY WATCH`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-query-watch.md), you can mark queries based on SQL text, SQL Digest, or execution plan. Queries that are marked can be downgraded or canceled.
> 
>     The ability of manually marking runaway queries provides an effective means of intervening in unexpected performance problems in the database. For query-induced performance problems, the impact on overall performance can be quickly mitigated before the root cause of the problem is found, improving system service quality. 
> 
>     For more information, refer to [user documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Manually mark queries that use resources more than expected (experimental) [#43691](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43691) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1446-->

    In v7.2.0, TiDB automatically manages queries that use resources more than expected (Runaway Query) by automatically downgrading or canceling runaway queries. In actual practice, rules alone cannot cover all cases. Therefore, TiDB v7.3.0 introduces the ability to manually mark runaway queries. With the new command [`QUERY WATCH`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-query-watch.md), you can mark runaway queries based on SQL text, SQL Digest, or execution plan, and the marked runaway queries can be downgraded or cancelled.

    This feature provides an effective intervention method for sudden performance issues in the database. For performance issues caused by queries, before identifying the root cause, this feature can quickly alleviate its impact on overall performance, thereby improving system service quality.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters).
```

### SQL

* List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions [#20679](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/20679) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw@qiancai** <!--1342-->

>     When you use the `INSERT` statement to insert data into List or List COLUMNS partitioned tables, the data needs to meet the specified partitioning conditions of the table. If the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, the execution of the statement will fail, or the data that does not meet any partitioning condition will be ignored.

Author: ```suggestion
    Before v7.3.0, when you use the `INSERT` statement to insert data into List or List COLUMNS partitioned tables, the data needs to meet the specified partitioning conditions of the table. If the data to be inserted does not meet any of these conditions, either the execution of the statement will fail or the non-compliant data will be ignored.
```
Use `either...or...` because `, or...` might be confused with `otherwise`.

>    Starting from v7.3.0, List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions. After a default partition is created, if the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, it will be written to the default partition. The default partition feature improves the usability of List and List COLUMNS partitioning, avoiding the execution failure of the `INSERT` statement or data being ignored due to data that does not meet partitioning conditions.

Author: ```suggestion
   Starting from v7.3.0, List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions. After a default partition is created, if the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, it will be written to the default partition. This feature improves the usability of List and List COLUMNS partitioning, avoiding the execution failure of the `INSERT` statement or data being ignored due to data that does not meet partitioning conditions.
```

    Note that this feature is a TiDB extension to MySQL syntax. For a partitioned table with a default partition, the data in the table cannot be directly replicated to MySQL.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#list-partition).

### DB operations

- note 1

- note 2

### Observability

> * Show the progress of collecting statistics [#issue号](链接) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Show the progress of collecting statistics [#44033](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44033) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->
```

    Collecting statistics for large tables often takes a long time. In previous versions, you cannot see the progress of collecting statistics, and therefore cannot predict the completion time. TiDB v7.3.0 introduces a feature to show the progress of collecting statistics. You can view the overall workload, current progress, and estimated completion time for each subtask using the system table `mysql.analyze_jobs` or `SHOW ANALYZE STATUS`. In scenarios such as large-scale data import and SQL performance optimization, this feature helps you understand the overall task progress and improves the user experience.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-analyze-status.md).

* Plan Replayer supports exporting historical statistics [#45038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45038) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1445-->

>     Starting from v7.3.0, with the newly added [`dump with stats as of timestamp`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) clause, Plan Replayer can export the statistics of specified SQL-related objects at a specific point in time. During the diagnosis of execution plan issues, accurately capturing historical statistics can help analyze more precisely how the execution plan was generated at the time when the issue occurred. This helps identify the root cause of the problem and greatly improves efficiency in diagnosing execution plan issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Starting from v7.3.0, with the newly added [`dump with stats as of timestamp`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) clause, Plan Replayer can export the statistics of specified SQL-related objects at a specific point in time. During the diagnosis of execution plan issues, accurately capturing historical statistics can help analyze more precisely how the execution plan was generated at the time when the issue occurred. This helps identify the root cause of the issue and greatly improves efficiency in diagnosing execution plan issues.
```

    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md).

### Data migration

> * TiDB Lightning introduces a new version of conflict data detection and processing capabilities [#41629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41629) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1296-->
>      
>     Previous versions of TiDB Lightning used different conflict detection and handling methods for logical and physical import modes, which were complicated to configure and not easy for users to understand. In addition, when you use physical import mode, conflicting data cannot be handled by the `replace` and `ignore` policies. In the new version of conflict detection and handling, both logical import mode and physical import mode use the same set of conflict detection and handling, that is, reporting error (`error`), replacing (`replace`) or ignoring (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicting data. It also allows you to set an upper limit on the number of conflict records, such as how many conflict records should be processed before the task is interrupted and exits. You can also let the program record the data in conflict for easy troubleshooting.
> 
>     When it is clear that the import data has a high amount of conflicting data, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict policy are mutually exclusive, and cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling policy will be deprecated in the future.
>     
>     For more information, refer to [user documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiDB Lightning introduces a new version of conflict data detection and handling strategy [#41629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41629) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1296-->

    In previous versions, TiDB Lightning uses different conflict detection and handling methods for Logical Import Mode and Physical Import Mode, which are complex to configure and not easy for users to understand. In addition, Physical Import Mode cannot handle conflicts using the `replace` or `ignore` policy. Starting from v7.3.0, TiDB Lightning introduces a unified conflict detection and handling strategy for both Logical Import Mode and Physical Import Mode. You can choose to report an error (`error`), replace (`replace`) or ignore (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicts. You can limit the number of conflict records, such as the task is interrupted and terminated after processing a specified number of conflict records. Furthermore, the system can record conflicting data for troubleshooting.

    For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection).
```

> * TiDB Lightning introduces a new parameter `enable-diagnose-log` to print more diagnostic logs and make it easier to pinpoint problems [#45497](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45497) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1517-->
>     
>     By default, this feature is not enabled and only prints logs containing `lightning/main`. When enabled, it prints logs for all packages (including `client-go` and `tidb`) to help diagnose problems related to `client-go` and `tidb`.
>     
>     For more information, refer to [user documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-global).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* TiDB Lightning introduces a new parameter `enable-diagnose-log` to enhance troubleshooting by printing more diagnostic logs [#45497](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45497) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1517-->

    By default, this feature is disabled and TiDB Lightning only prints logs containing `lightning/main`. When enabled, TiDB Lightning prints logs for all packages (including `client-go` and `tidb`) to help diagnose issues related to `client-go` and `tidb`.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-global).
```

## Compatibility changes

> **注意：**
>
> 以下为从 v7.1.0 升级至当前版本 (v7.2.0) 所需兼容性变更信息。如果从 v7.0.0 或之前版本升级到当前版本，可能也需要考虑和查看中间版本 release notes 中提到的兼容性变更信息。

### Behavior changes

<!-- 此小节包含 MySQL 兼容性变更-->

* TiDB Lightning **tw@hfxsd**

    - `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` is deprecated and replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).

>     - The `max-error` parameter for the maximum number of non-fatal errors that can be tolerated before TiDB Lightning stops the migration task no longer contains an upper limit for import data conflicts. A new parameter [`conflict.threshold`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) controls the maximum number of conflicting records that can be tolerated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The `max-error` parameter, which controls the maximum number of non-fatal errors that TiDB Lightning can tolerate before stopping the migration task, no longer limits import data conflicts. The [`conflict.threshold`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) parameter now controls the maximum number of conflicting records that can be tolerated.
```

* 兼容性 2

### System variables

| 变量名  | 修改类型（包括新增/修改/删除）    | 描述 |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery-从-v610-版本开始引入) | 修改 | 经进一步的测试后，该变量默认值从 `OFF` 修改为 `ON`，即优化器改写会移除子查询中的 `ORDER BY` 子句。 |

> |        |                              |      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tiflash_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls the strategy for selecting TiFlash replicas when a query requires the TiFlash engine. |
```

|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.threshold` | Newly added | Controls the upper limit of the conflicting data. When `conflict.strategy="error"`, the default value is `0`. When `conflict.strategy="replace”` or `conflict.strategy=“ignore"`, you can set it as a maxint. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `enable-diagnose-logs` | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the diagnostic logs. The default value is `false`, that is, only the logs related to the import are output, and the logs of other dependent components are not output. When you set it to `true`, logs from both the import process and other dependent components are output, and GRPC debugging is enabled, which can be used for diagnosis. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` | Deprecated | Controls action to do when trying to insert a conflicting record in the logical import mode. Startign from v7.3.0, this parameter is replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task). |

> | Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.incremental-import` | Deleted | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. Because it could easily be mistaken as an incremental import parameter, this parameter is now renamed to `tikv-importer.parallel-import`. If a user passes in the old parameter name, it will be automatically converted to the new one. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused.  **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
| Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|
```

* TiFlash supports Runtime Filter within nodes [#40220](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40220) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1130-->

    Runtime Filter is a predicate that generates dynamic values during query planning. During the process of table joining, these dynamic predicates can further filter out rows that do not meet the conditions, reducing scan time and network overhead, and improving the efficiency of table joining. Starting from v7.3.0, TiFlash supports Runtime Filter within nodes, improving the overall performance of analytical queries with performance improvements ranging from 10% to 50% in some TPC-DS workloads.

    This feature is disabled by default in v7.3.0. To enable this feature, set the system variable [`tidb_runtime_filter_mode`](/system-variables.md#tidb_runtime_filter_mode-new-in-v720) to `LOCAL`.

    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/runtime-filter.md).

* TiFlash supports executing common table expressions (CTEs) (experimental) [#43333](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43333) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1244-->

>     Before v7.3.0, the MPP engine of TiFlash cannot execute queries that contain CTEs by default. To achieve the best execution performance within the MPP framework, you need to use the system variable [`tidb_opt_force_inline_cte`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_force_inline_cte-introduced-since-v630) to inline expand CTE.

Author: ```suggestion
    Before v7.3.0, the MPP engine of TiFlash cannot execute queries that contain CTEs by default. To achieve the best execution performance within the MPP framework, you need to use the system variable [`tidb_opt_force_inline_cte`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_force_inline_cte-introduced-since-v630) to enforce inlining CTE.
```

Reviewer: LGTM

    Starting from v7.3.0, TiFlash's MPP engine supports executing queries with CTEs without inline expanding them, allowing for optimal query execution within the MPP framework. In TPC-DS benchmark tests, compared to using inline expansion, this feature has shown a 20% improvement in overall query execution speed for queries containing CTE.

    This feature is an experimental feature and is disabled by default. It is controlled by the system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution-new-in-v720).

### Reliability

* Add new optimizer hints [#45520](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45520) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1457-->

    In v7.3.0, TiDB introduces several new optimizer hints to control the join methods between tables, including:

    - [`INDEX_JOIN()`](link) selects index nested loop join, which uses indexes to filter and use the result set as the inner table to join.
    - [`NO_HASH_JOIN()`](link) selects join methods other than hash join.

>     - [`NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()`](link) selects join methods other than [index nested loop join](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join).

Author: ```suggestion
    - [`NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than [index nested loop join](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join).
```

    For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

* TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV (experimental) [#15069](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/15069) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1507-->

    TiDB Lightning now supports Partitioned Raft KV. When you use the Partitioned Raft KV feature, you can improve the performance of data import by TiDB Lightning.

```

* TiDB Lightning **tw@hfxsd**

    - 逻辑导入模式插入冲突数据时执行的操作，默认配置从 on-duplicate = "replace" 改为 on-duplicate = "error" 即遇到冲突数据即报错。
    - TiDB Lightning 停止迁移任务之前能容忍的最大非严重 (non-fatal errors) 错误数的参数 "max-error" 不再包含导入数据冲突的上限。而是由新的参数 "conflict.threshold" 来控制可容忍的最大冲突的记录数。

* 兼容性 2

### System variables

| 变量名  | 修改类型（包括新增/修改/删除）    | 描述 |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery-从-v610-版本开始引入) | 修改 | 经进一步的测试后，该变量默认值从 `OFF` 修改为 `ON`，即优化器改写会移除子查询中的 `ORDER BY` 子句。 |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |

### Configuration file parameters

| 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
|          |          |          |          |
|          |          |          |          |
| TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-pairs` | 废弃 | 从 7.2 版本开始 TiDB Lightning 配置文件的参数 "send-kv-pairs" 不再生效，由新的参数 "send-kv-size" 代替。该新参数用于指定 KV 键值对的大小阈值，单位为 KiB 或 MiB，默认值为 "16 KiB"。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表等一些场景因为 Lightning 节点内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420--> |

> | TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-size` | 新增 | 从 7.2 版本开始在 Lightning 配置文件 "[tikv-importer]" 这个 Session 中引入 `send-kv-size` 参数，用于设置发单次送到 TiKV 的 KV pairs 的大小。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将被 Lightning 立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表的时候 Lightning 节点因为内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。通过调整 "send-kv-size" 参数，你可以在内存使用和导入速度之间找到平衡，提高导入过程的稳定性和效率。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420-->|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-size` | 新增 | 从 7.2 版本开始在 Lightning 配置文件 "[tikv-importer]" 这个 Session 中引入 `send-kv-size` 参数，用于设置发单次送到 TiKV 的 KV pairs 的大小。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将被 Lightning 立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表的时候 Lightning 节点因为内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。通过调整 "send-kv-size" 参数，你可以在内存使用和导入速度之间找到平衡，提高导入过程的稳定性和效率。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420-->|
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | 新增 | TiDB Lightning 并行导入参数。用于替代原有的 `tikv-importer.incremental-import` 参数，因为原有的参数容易被误认为是增量导入的参数而导致误用。 **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
|TiDB Lightning  | tikv-importer.incremental-import | 删除 | TiDB Lightning 并行导入参数的旧名称，因为该参数名会被误认为增量导入的参数而误用，因此用新的参数名 tikv-importer.parallel-import 代替，且如果用户传入旧的参数会被自动转成新的参数名|
```

> * 兼容性 2

Author: ```suggestion
* TiCDC **tw@ran-huang**

    - When Kafka sink uses Avro protocol, if the `force-replicate` parameter is set to `true`, TiCDC reports an error when creating a changefeed.
    - Due to incompatibility between `delete-only-output-handle-key-columns` and `force-replicate` parameters, when both parameters are enabled, TiCDC reports an error when creating a changefeed.
```

### DB operations

- note 1

- note 2

### Observability

* 显示统计信息收集的进度 [#issue号](链接) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->

    对大表的统计信息收集经常会持续比较长的时间。在过去的版本里，用户无从得知统计信息收集的进度，进而没法预测完成时间。在 v7.3.0 中，TiDB 加入了对统计信息收集进度的信息展示，能够显示各个子任务的总体工作量、当前进度、以及对完成时间的预测。在大规模数据导入、SQL 性能优化等场景下，用户能够了解整体任务进展，提升用户体验。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

* Plan Replayer supports exporting historical statistics [#45038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45038) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1445-->

    Starting from v7.3.0, with the newly added [`dump with stats as of timestamp`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) clause, Plan Replayer can export the statistics of specified SQL-related objects at a specific point in time. During the diagnosis of execution plan issues, accurately capturing historical statistics can help analyze more precisely how the execution plan was generated at the time when the issue occurred. This helps identify the root cause of the problem and greatly improves efficiency in diagnosing execution plan issues.

    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md).

### Data migration

> * Lightning 引入新版冲突数据检测与处理的能力 [#41629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41629) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1296-->
> 
>     之前的版本 Lightning 逻辑导入和物理导入模式都有各自的冲突检测和处理的方式，配置较为复杂且不利于用户理解。同时使用物理导入模式，冲突的数据无法通过 replace 和 ignore 策略来处理。新版的冲突检测和处理方式，逻辑导入和物理导入都是用同一套冲突检测和处理方式即遇到冲突数据报错，或者 replace 以及 ignore 掉冲突数据。同时还支持用户设置冲突记录的上限，如处理多少冲突记录后任务中断退出，用户也可以让程序记录哪些数据发生了冲突，方便用户排查。
> 
>     在明确所需导入数据有较多的冲突数据时，推荐使用新版的冲突检测和处理策略，会有更好的性能。注意新、旧版冲突策略互斥使用，会在未来废弃掉旧版冲突检测和处理策略。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。
> 
> * Lightning 支持 Partitioned Raft KV（实验特性） [#15069](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/15069) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1507-->
> 
>     该版本 Lightning 支持了 Partitioned Raft KV ，当用户使用了 Partitioned Raft KV 特性后，能提升 Lightning 导入数据的性能。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。
> 
> * Lightning 引入新的参数"enable-diagnose-log" 用于打印更多的诊断日志，方便定位问题 [#45497](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45497) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1517-->
> 
>     默认情况下，此功能未启用，只会打印包含 "lightning/main" 的日志。当启用时，将打印所有包（包括 "client-go" 和 "tidb"）的日志，以帮助诊断与 "client-go" 和 "tidb" 相关的问题。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* TiDB Lightning introduces a new version of conflict data detection and processing capabilities [#41629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41629) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1296-->
     
    之前的版本 TiDB Lightning 逻辑导入模式和物理导入模式都有各自的冲突检测和处理的方式，配置较为复杂且不利于用户理解。另外使用物理导入模式，冲突的数据无法通过替换 (`replace`) 和 (`ignore`) 策略来处理。新版的冲突检测和处理方式，逻辑导入模式和物理导入模式都使用同一套冲突检测和处理方式，即遇到冲突数据报错 (`error`)、替换 (`replace`) 或忽略 (`ignore`) 冲突数据。同时还支持用户设置冲突记录的上限，如处理多少冲突记录后任务中断退出，你也可以让程序记录哪些数据发生了冲突，方便排查。
    Previous versions of TiDB Lightning had their own conflict detection and handling methods for both logical and physical import modes, which were complicated to configure and not easy for users to understand. In addition, using physical import mode, conflicting data cannot be handled by the `replace` and `ignore` policies. The new version of conflict detection and handling, both logical import mode and physical import mode use the same set of conflict detection and handling, that is, reporting error (`error`), replacing (`replace`) or ignoring (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicting data. It also allows you to set an upper limit on the number of conflict records, such as how many conflict records should be processed before the task is interrupted and exited. You can also let the program record which data is in conflict for easy troubleshooting.

    在明确所需导入数据有较多的冲突数据时，推荐使用新版的冲突检测和处理策略，会有更好的性能。注意新版和旧版冲突策略互斥，不能同时使用。未来将废弃旧版冲突检测和处理策略。
    When it is clear that the required import data has a high amount of conflicting data, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy, which will have better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict policy are mutually exclusive and cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling policy will be deprecated in the future.
    
    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection).

* TiDB Lightning introduces a new parameter, `enable-diagnose-log`, to print more diagnostic logs and make it easier to pinpoint problems [#45497](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45497) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1517-->
    
    默认情况下，此功能未启用，只会打印包含 `lightning/main` 的日志。当启用时，将打印所有包（包括 `client-go` 和 `tidb`）的日志，以帮助诊断与 `client-go` 和 `tidb` 相关的问题。
    By default, this feature is not enabled and only prints logs containing `lightning/main`. When enabled, it prints logs for all packages (including `client-go` and `tidb`) to help diagnose problems related to `client-go` and `tidb`.
    
    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-global).
```

|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery-从-v610-版本开始引入) | 修改 | 经进一步的测试后，该变量默认值从 `OFF` 修改为 `ON`，即优化器改写会移除子查询中的 `ORDER BY` 子句。 |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |

### Configuration file parameters

| 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
|          |          |          |          |
|          |          |          |          |
| TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-pairs` | 废弃 | 从 7.2 版本开始 TiDB Lightning 配置文件的参数 "send-kv-pairs" 不再生效，由新的参数 "send-kv-size" 代替。该新参数用于指定 KV 键值对的大小阈值，单位为 KiB 或 MiB，默认值为 "16 KiB"。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表等一些场景因为 Lightning 节点内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420--> |
| TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-size` | 新增 | 从 7.2 版本开始在 Lightning 配置文件 "[tikv-importer]" 这个 Session 中引入 `send-kv-size` 参数，用于设置发单次送到 TiKV 的 KV pairs 的大小。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将被 Lightning 立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表的时候 Lightning 节点因为内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。通过调整 "send-kv-size" 参数，你可以在内存使用和导入速度之间找到平衡，提高导入过程的稳定性和效率。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420-->|

> |TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | 新增 | TiDB Lightning 并行导入参数。用于替代原有的 `tikv-importer.incremental-import` 参数，因为原有的参数容易被误认为是增量导入的参数而导致误用。 **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
> |TiDB Lightning  | tikv-importer.incremental-import | 删除 | TiDB Lightning 并行导入参数的旧名称，因为该参数名会被误认为增量导入的参数而误用，因此用新的参数名 tikv-importer.parallel-import 代替，且如果用户传入旧的参数会被自动转成新的参数名|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | [`tikv-importer.parallel-import`](/tidb-lightning-distributed-import.md#第-2-步配置-tidb-lightning-的数据源) | 新增 | TiDB Lightning 并行导入参数。用于替代原有的 `tikv-importer.incremental-import` 参数，因为原有的参数容易被误认为是增量导入的参数而导致误用。 **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
|TiDB Lightning  | tikv-importer.incremental-import | 删除 | TiDB Lightning 并行导入参数的旧名称，因为该参数名会被误认为增量导入的参数而误用，因此用新的参数名 tikv-importer.parallel-import 代替，且如果用户传入旧的参数会被自动转成新的参数名|
```

Reviewer: @lyzx2001 PTAL

Reviewer 4: lgtm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused.  **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.incremental-import` | Deleted | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. Because it could easily be mistaken as an incremental import parameter, this parameter is now renamed to `tikv-importer.parallel-import`. If a user passes in the old parameter name, it will be automatically converted to the new one. |
```

> | TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-pairs` | 废弃 | 从 7.2 版本开始 TiDB Lightning 配置文件的参数 "send-kv-pairs" 不再生效，由新的参数 "send-kv-size" 代替。该新参数用于指定 KV 键值对的大小阈值，单位为 KiB 或 MiB，默认值为 "16 KiB"。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表等一些场景因为 Lightning 节点内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420--> |
> | TiDB Lightning | `send-kv-size` | 新增 | 从 7.2 版本开始在 Lightning 配置文件 "[tikv-importer]" 这个 Session 中引入 `send-kv-size` 参数，用于设置发单次送到 TiKV 的 KV pairs 的大小。当 KV 键值对的大小达到设定的阈值时，它们将被 Lightning 立即发送到 TiKV，避免在导入大宽表的时候 Lightning 节点因为内存积累键值对过多导致 OOM 的问题。通过调整 "send-kv-size" 参数，你可以在内存使用和导入速度之间找到平衡，提高导入过程的稳定性和效率。**tw@hfxsd** <!--1420-->|
> |TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused.  **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
> |TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.incremental-import` | Deleted | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. Because it could easily be mistaken as an incremental import parameter, this parameter is now renamed to `tikv-importer.parallel-import`. If a user passes in the old parameter name, it will be automatically converted to the new one. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.max-record-rows` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It controls the maximum number of rows in the `conflict_records` table. The default value is 100. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.strategy` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data.  It includes the following options: "" (TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data), `error` (terminate the import and report an error if a primary or unique key conflict is detected in the imported data), `replace` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the new data is retained and the old data is overwritten.), `ignore` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the old data is retained and the new data is ignored.). The default value is "", that is, TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.threshold` | Newly added | Controls the upper limit of the conflicting data. When `conflict.strategy="error"`, the default value is `0`. When `conflict.strategy="replace”` or `conflict.strategy=“ignore"`, you can set it as a maxint. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `enable-diagnose-logs` | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the diagnostic logs. The default value is `false`, that is, only the logs related to the import are output, and the logs of other dependent components are not output. When you set it to `true`, logs from both the import process and other dependent components are output, and GRPC debugging is enabled, which can be used for diagnosis. |
```

| Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|

> 

Author: ```suggestion
| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |

```

    When you use the `INSERT` statement to insert data into List or List COLUMNS partitioned tables, the data needs to meet the specified partitioning conditions of the table. If the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, the execution of the statement will fail, or the data that does not meet any partitioning condition will be ignored.

   Starting from v7.3.0, List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions. After a default partition is created, if the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, it will be written to the default partition. The default partition feature improves the usability of List and List COLUMNS partitioning, avoiding the execution failure of the `INSERT` statement or data being ignored due to data that does not meet partitioning conditions.

    Note that this feature is a TiDB extension to MySQL syntax. For a partitioned table with a default partition, the data in the table cannot be directly replicated to MySQL.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#list-partition).

### DB operations

- note 1

- note 2

### Observability

> * 显示统计信息收集的进度 [#issue号](链接) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->
> 
>     对大表的统计信息收集经常会持续比较长的时间。在过去的版本里，用户无从得知统计信息收集的进度，进而没法预测完成时间。在 v7.3.0 中，TiDB 加入了对统计信息收集进度的信息展示，能够显示各个子任务的总体工作量、当前进度、以及对完成时间的预测。在大规模数据导入、SQL 性能优化等场景下，用户能够了解整体任务进展，提升用户体验。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Show the progress of collecting statistics [#issue号](链接) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->

    Collecting statistics for large tables often takes a long time. In previous versions, you cannot see the progress of collecting statistics, and therefore cannot predict the completion time. TiDB v7.3.0 introduces a feature to show the progress of collecting statistics. You can view the overall workload, current progress, and estimated completion time for each subtask using the system table `mysql.analyze_jobs` or `SHOW ANALYZE STATUS`. In scenarios such as large-scale data import and SQL performance optimization, this feature helps you understand the overall task progress and improves the user experience.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-analyze-status.md).
```

    之前的版本 Lightning 逻辑导入和物理导入模式都有各自的冲突检测和处理的方式，配置较为复杂且不利于用户理解。同时使用物理导入模式，冲突的数据无法通过 replace 和 ignore 策略来处理。新版的冲突检测和处理方式，逻辑导入和物理导入都是用同一套冲突检测和处理方式即遇到冲突数据报错，或者 replace 以及 ignore 掉冲突数据。同时还支持用户设置冲突记录的上限，如处理多少冲突记录后任务中断退出，用户也可以让程序记录哪些数据发生了冲突，方便用户排查。

    在明确所需导入数据有较多的冲突数据时，推荐使用新版的冲突检测和处理策略，会有更好的性能。注意新、旧版冲突策略互斥使用，会在未来废弃掉旧版冲突检测和处理策略。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

* Lightning 支持 Partitioned Raft KV（实验特性） [#15069](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/15069) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1507-->

    该版本 Lightning 支持了 Partitioned Raft KV ，当用户使用了 Partitioned Raft KV 特性后，能提升 Lightning 导入数据的性能。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

* Lightning 引入新的参数"enable-diagnose-log" 用于打印更多的诊断日志，方便定位问题 [#45497](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45497) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1517-->

    默认情况下，此功能未启用，只会打印包含 "lightning/main" 的日志。当启用时，将打印所有包（包括 "client-go" 和 "tidb"）的日志，以帮助诊断与 "client-go" 和 "tidb" 相关的问题。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

## Compatibility changes

> **注意：**
>
> 以下为从 v7.1.0 升级至当前版本 (v7.2.0) 所需兼容性变更信息。如果从 v7.0.0 或之前版本升级到当前版本，可能也需要考虑和查看中间版本 release notes 中提到的兼容性变更信息。

### Behavior changes

<!-- 此小节包含 MySQL 兼容性变更-->

* TiDB Lightning **tw@hfxsd**

>     - 逻辑导入模式插入冲突数据时执行的操作，默认配置从 on-duplicate = "replace" 改为 on-duplicate = "error" 即遇到冲突数据即报错。
>     - TiDB Lightning 停止迁移任务之前能容忍的最大非严重 (non-fatal errors) 错误数的参数 "max-error" 不再包含导入数据冲突的上限。而是由新的参数 "conflict.threshold" 来控制可容忍的最大冲突的记录数。

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` is deprecated and replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).
    - The `max-error` parameter for the maximum number of non-fatal errors that can be tolerated before TiDB Lightning stops the migration task no longer contains an upper limit for import data conflicts. A new parameter [`conflict.threshold`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) controls the maximum number of conflicting records that can be tolerated.
```

| Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|
| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |

## Deprecated features

- note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - 游标 (Cursor) 结果过大时，写入 TiDB 临时磁盘空间从而避免OOM [#43233](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43233) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao) <!--1430-->

>     - EXPLAIN 新增开关用以展示在优化期间被执行的子查询 [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros] **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--983-->
>     - 在启用 [`Global Kill`](/tidb-configuration-file#enable-global-kill-从-v610-版本开始引入) 的情况下，可以通过 Ctrl+C 终止当前会话。 [#8854](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8854) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Introduce a new system variable `tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery` to control whether the `EXPLAIN` statement executes subqueries in advance during the optimization phase [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--983-->
    - When [Global Kill](/tidb-configuration-file#enable-global-kill-new-in-v610) is enabled, you can terminate the current session by pressing <kbd>Control+C</kbd> [#8854](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8854) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - Support a new DTFile format version to reduce the number of physical files (experimental) [#7595](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7595) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai** <!--？-->
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - 为外部存储 Azure Blob Storage 提供加密范围和加密密钥的支持 [#45025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45025) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1385-->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - When backing up data to Azure Blob Storage using BR, you can specify either an encryption scope or an encryption key for server-side encryption [#45025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45025) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1385-->
```

    For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

* TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV (experimental) [#14916](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14916) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1507-->

    TiDB Lightning now supports Partitioned Raft KV. This feature helps improve the data import performance of TiDB Lightning.

```

    Before v7.3.0, the MPP engine of TiFlash cannot execute queries that contain CTEs by default. To achieve the best execution performance within the MPP framework, you need to use the system variable [`tidb_opt_force_inline_cte`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_force_inline_cte-introduced-since-v630) to enforce inlining CTE.

    Starting from v7.3.0, TiFlash's MPP engine supports executing queries with CTEs without inlining them, allowing for optimal query execution within the MPP framework. In TPC-DS benchmark tests, compared with inlining CTEs, this feature has shown a 20% improvement in overall query execution speed for queries containing CTE.

    This feature is experimental and is disabled by default. It is controlled by the system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution-new-in-v720).

### Reliability

* Add new optimizer hints [#45520](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45520) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1457-->

    In v7.3.0, TiDB introduces several new optimizer hints to control the join methods between tables, including:

>     - [`INDEX_JOIN()`](link) selects index nested loop join, which uses indexes to filter and uses the filter result as the inner table to join.

Author: ```suggestion
    - [`NO_MERGE_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_merge_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than merge join.
    - [`NO_INDEX_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than index nested loop join.
    - [`NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_merge_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than index nested loop merge join.
```

Reviewer: LGTM

    - [`NO_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than hash join.

>     - [`NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than [index nested loop join](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than [index nested loop hash join](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join).
```

## Compatibility changes

> **注意：**
>
> 以下为从 v7.1.0 升级至当前版本 (v7.2.0) 所需兼容性变更信息。如果从 v7.0.0 或之前版本升级到当前版本，可能也需要考虑和查看中间版本 release notes 中提到的兼容性变更信息。

### Behavior changes

<!-- 此小节包含 MySQL 兼容性变更-->

* TiDB Lightning **tw@hfxsd**

    - `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` is deprecated and replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).
    - The `max-error` parameter, which controls the maximum number of non-fatal errors that TiDB Lightning can tolerate before stopping the migration task, no longer limits import data conflicts. The [`conflict.threshold`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) parameter now controls the maximum number of conflicting records that can be tolerated.

* TiCDC **tw@ran-huang**

    - When Kafka sink uses Avro protocol, if the `force-replicate` parameter is set to `true`, TiCDC reports an error when creating a changefeed.
    - Due to incompatibility between `delete-only-output-handle-key-columns` and `force-replicate` parameters, when both parameters are enabled, TiCDC reports an error when creating a changefeed.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
    - When the output protocol is Open Protocol, the `UPDATE` events only output the changed columns.

```

|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused.  **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |
| Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|
| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#ticdc-changefeed-配置文件说明) | 新增 | CSV 协议中二进制类型数据的编码方式，可选 `'base64'` 与 `'hex'`。默认值为 `'base64'`。 |
```

| Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|
| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |
| TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | The encoding method of binary data, which can be `'base64'` or `'hex'`. The default value is `'base64'`. |

> ## Deprecated features

Author: ```suggestion

### 系统表

- 新增系统表 `mysql.tidb_timers` 用来存储系统内部定时器的元信息。
	
## Deprecated features
```

| Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|
| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |
| TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | The encoding method of binary data, which can be `'base64'` or `'hex'`. The default value is `'base64'`. |
## Deprecated features

- note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - 游标 (Cursor) 结果过大时，写入 TiDB 临时磁盘空间从而避免OOM [#43233](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/43233) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao) <!--1430-->

>     - Introduce a new system variable `tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery` to control whether the `EXPLAIN` statement executes subqueries in advance during the optimization phase [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--983-->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Introduce a new system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) to control whether the `EXPLAIN` statement executes subqueries in advance during the optimization phase [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--983-->
```

+ TiFlash

    - Support a new DTFile format version to reduce the number of physical files (experimental) [#7595](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7595) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai** <!--？-->
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - When backing up data to Azure Blob Storage using BR, you can specify either an encryption scope or an encryption key for server-side encryption [#45025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45025) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1385-->
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - Kafka Sink supports sending only handle key data when the message is too large, reducing the size of the message [#9382](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9382) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1406-->
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - 更新 TiDB Lightning 并行导入的参数名称从 "tikv-importer.incremental-import" 变更为 “tikv-importer.parallel-import” ，避免用户误认为是增量导入而误用该参数。 [#45501](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45501) @[lyzx2001](https://github.com/lyzx2001) **tw@hfxsd**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    Before v7.3.0, when you use the `INSERT` statement to insert data into List or List COLUMNS partitioned tables, the data needs to meet the specified partitioning conditions of the table. If the data to be inserted does not meet any of these conditions, either the execution of the statement will fail or the non-compliant data will be ignored.

   Starting from v7.3.0, List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions. After a default partition is created, if the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, it will be written to the default partition. This feature improves the usability of List and List COLUMNS partitioning, avoiding the execution failure of the `INSERT` statement or data being ignored due to data that does not meet partitioning conditions.

    Note that this feature is a TiDB extension to MySQL syntax. For a partitioned table with a default partition, the data in the table cannot be directly replicated to MySQL.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#list-partition).

> ### DB operations

Reviewer 5: "[Support default partition for list (columns) partition table](https://internal.pingcap.net/jira/browse/FD-1342)" should go here, right?

Reviewer: @joey-yez PTAL

Reviewer 6: This feature is not any operation on the database, but an new partition in the partition table. I think this should stay in SQL part.

- note 1

- note 2

### Observability

* Show the progress of collecting statistics [#44033](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44033) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->

>     Collecting statistics for large tables often takes a long time. In previous versions, you cannot see the progress of collecting statistics, and therefore cannot predict the completion time. TiDB v7.3.0 introduces a feature to show the progress of collecting statistics. You can view the overall workload, current progress, and estimated completion time for each subtask using the system table `mysql.analyze_jobs` or `SHOW ANALYZE STATUS`. In scenarios such as large-scale data import and SQL performance optimization, this feature helps you understand the overall task progress and improves the user experience.

Reviewer 5: > In scenarios such as large-scale data import and SQL performance optimization, this feature helps you understand the overall task progress and improves the user experience.

Is this feature for viewing the progress of any background job, or just ANALYZE? If just ANALYZE, I'm not sure I understand the relevance of this quoted sentence.

Reviewer 7: Just ANALYZE.  The common scenarios to issue ANALYZE manually: 
- After bulk load, ANALYZE the tables that are just loaded before providing the service
- When bad plan is found, it could be caused by stale statistics.  In this case, we will issue ANALYZE and wait for its completion. 

With progress of Analyze, users are able to know it's working and remaining seconds approximately. That's the reason I put this sentence.  Please help me refine the words if necessary.

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2023

TiDB version: 7.3.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.3.0#version-list)

7.3.0 introduces the following major feature as generally available. The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="1">Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td>Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>

>     <td>Lightning import service now supports the new Partitioned Raft KV architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.

Author: @Frank945946 PTAL

>     <td>Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>
>     <td>Lightning import service now supports the new Partitioned Raft KV architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>
    <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new Partitioned Raft KV architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.
```

Reviewer 8: LGTM

    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on imports</td>

>     <td>In the Lightning local backend data import scenario, support is provided for pre-checking conflict records and implementing the semantics of replace and insert ignore. It automatically handles conflicting data for users while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>

Author: @Frank945946 PTAL

>     <td>In the Lightning local backend data import scenario, support is provided for pre-checking conflict records and implementing the semantics of replace and insert ignore. It automatically handles conflicting data for users while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>The TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports pre-checking conflict records and implementing the semantics of replace (`replace`) or ignore (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicts. It automatically handles conflicting data for you while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>
    <td>Query timeouts exist on a per-TiKV node basis but now Resource Groups can manage queries by global parallel execution time and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to configure this timeout and what do with the queries at a Resource Group level, gives them much more control over the impact unexpected large queries may have on the cluster.</td>

>   </tr>

Author: @songrijie @hfxsd PTAL

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>
    <td>Query timeouts exist on a per-TiKV node basis but now Resource Groups can manage queries by global parallel execution time and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to mark target queries by SQL manually Text, SQL Digest or Plan Digest and what do with the queries at a Resource Group level, gives them much more control over the impact unexpected large queries may have on the cluster.</td>
  </tr>
```

  <tr>
    <td>SQL</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/optimizer-hints">Enhanced operator control over query stability by adding more complex operator hints to the query planner</a></td>

>     <td>Added hints: <code>NO_HASH_JOIN()</code>, <code>INDEX_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()</code>

Author: @songrijie

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/optimizer-hints">Enhanced optimizer control over query stability by adding more complex optimizer hints to the query planner</a></td>
    <td>Added hints: <code>NO_INDEX_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_HASH_JOIN()</code>,  <code>NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()</code>
```

  <tr>
    <td>DB Operations and Observability</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-plan-replayer">Added command to show progress of cluster stats collection</a></td>
>     <td>Add <code>SHOW ANALYZE STATUS</code> to peer into the progress of a cluster <code>ANALYZE</code> job.</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-statement-show-analyze-status">Show the progress of statistics collection tasks</a></td>
    <td>Support viewing the progress of <code>ANALYZE</code> tasks using <code>SHOW ANALYZE STATUS</code> or through the system table <code>mysql.analyze_jobs</code>.</td>
```

Reviewer 7: LGTM

>   </tr>

Author: @songrijie @Oreoxmt PTAL

| [`tidb_lock_unchanged_keys`](/system-variables.md#tidb_lock_unchanged_keys-new-in-v711-and-v730) | Newly added | This variable is used to control in certain scenarios whether to lock the keys that are involved but not modified in a transaction. |
| [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls whether the `EXPLAIN` statement disables the execution of constant subqueries that can be expanded at the optimization stage.  |
| [`tidb_skip_missing_partition_stats`](/system-variables.md#tidb_skip_missing_partition_stats-new-in-v730) | Newly added | This variable controls the generation of GlobalStats when partition statistics are missing. |
| [`tiflash_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls the strategy for selecting TiFlash replicas when a query requires the TiFlash engine. |

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

> | TiDB | [`enable-32bits-connection-id`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-32bits-connection-id-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the 32-bit connection ID feature. |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`enable-32bits-connection-id`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-32bits-connection-id-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the 32-bit connection ID feature. |
| TiDB | [`in-mem-slow-query-topn-num`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#in-mem-slow-query-topn-num-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls the number of slowest queries that are cached in memory. |
| TiDB | [`in-mem-slow-query-recent-num`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#in-mem-slow-query-recent-num-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls the number of recently used slow queries that are cached in memory. |
```

Reviewer 3: 我把最后两个顺序颠倒了下，按字母顺序排列

| TiFlash | [`storage.format_version`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) | Modified | Introduces a new DTFile format `format_version = 5` to reduce the number of physical files by merging smaller files. Note that this format is experimental and not enabled by default. |
| TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.incremental-import` | Deleted | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. Because it could easily be mistaken as an incremental import parameter, this parameter is now renamed to `tikv-importer.parallel-import`. If a user passes in the old parameter name, it will be automatically converted to the new one. |
| TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` | Deprecated | Controls action to do when trying to insert a conflicting record in the logical import mode. Starting from v7.3.0, this parameter is replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task). |

> | TiDB Lightning | `conflict.max-record-rows` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It controls the maximum number of rows in the `conflict_records` table. The default value is 100. |
> | TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.strategy` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It includes the following options: "" (TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data), `error` (terminate the import and report an error if a primary or unique key conflict is detected in the imported data), `replace` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the new data is retained and the old data is overwritten.), `ignore` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the old data is retained and the new data is ignored.). The default value is "", that is, TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data. |
> | TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.threshold` | Newly added | Controls the upper limit of the conflicting data. When `conflict.strategy="error"`, the default value is `0`. When `conflict.strategy="replace"` or `conflict.strategy="ignore"`, you can set it as a maxint. |
> | TiDB Lightning  | `enable-diagnose-logs` | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the diagnostic logs. The default value is `false`, that is, only the logs related to the import are output, and the logs of other dependent components are not output. When you set it to `true`, logs from both the import process and other dependent components are output, and GRPC debugging is enabled, which can be used for diagnosis. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB Lightning | [`conflict.max-record-rows`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md) | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It controls the maximum number of rows in the `conflict_records` table. The default value is 100. |
| TiDB Lightning  | [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md) | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It includes the following options: "" (TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data), `error` (terminate the import and report an error if a primary or unique key conflict is detected in the imported data), `replace` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the new data is retained and the old data is overwritten.), `ignore` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the old data is retained and the new data is ignored.). The default value is "", that is, TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data. |
| TiDB Lightning  | [`conflict.threshold`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md) | Newly added | Controls the upper limit of the conflicting data. When `conflict.strategy="error"`, the default value is `0`. When `conflict.strategy="replace"` or `conflict.strategy="ignore"`, you can set it as a maxint. |
| TiDB Lightning  | [`enable-diagnose-logs`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the diagnostic logs. The default value is `false`, that is, only the logs related to the import are output, and the logs of other dependent components are not output. When you set it to `true`, logs from both the import process and other dependent components are output, and GRPC debugging is enabled, which can be used for diagnosis. |
```

> |TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | [`tikv-importer.parallel-import`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md) | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused. |
```

|BR  | `azblob.encryption-scope` | Newly added | BR provides encryption scope support for Azure Blob Storage. |
|BR  | `azblob.encryption-key` | Newly added | BR provides encryption key support for Azure Blob Storage. |
| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |

> | TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | The encoding method of binary data, which can be `'base64'` or `'hex'`. The default value is `'base64'`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | Newly added | The encoding method of binary data, which can be `'base64'` or `'hex'`. The default value is `'base64'`. |
```

### System tables

- Add a new system table `mysql.tidb_timers` to store the metadata of internal timers.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

## Deprecated features

* TiDB

    - The [`Fast Analyze`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_fast_analyze) feature (experimental) for statistics will be deprecated in v7.5.0.
    - The [incremental collection](/statistics.md#incremental-collection) feature for statistics will be deprecated in v7.5.0.

```

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - Introduce a new system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) to control whether the `EXPLAIN` statement executes subqueries in advance during the optimization phase [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros)
    - When [Global Kill](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-global-kill-new-in-v610) is enabled, you can terminate the current session by pressing <kbd>Control+C</kbd> [#8854](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8854) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu)
    - Support the `IS_FREE_LOCK()` and `IS_USED_LOCK()` locking functions [#44493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44493) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
    - Optimize the performance of reading the dumped chunks from disk [#45125](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45125) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
    - Optimize the overestimation issue of the inner table of index join by using optimizer fix controls [#44855](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44855) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate)

```

Reviewer 3: 直接在你的 comment 里更新了

    - Fix the `duplicate entry` error that occurs when restoring a table with `AUTO_ID_CACHE=1` using BR [#44716](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44716) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
    - Fix the issue that the time consumed for executing `TRUNCATE TABLE` is inconsistent with the task execution time shown in `ADMIN SHOW DDL JOBS` [#44785](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44785) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that upgrading TiDB gets stuck when reading metadata takes longer than one DDL lease [#45176](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45176) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala)
    - Fix the issue that the query result of the `SELECT CAST(n AS CHAR)` statement is incorrect when `n` in the statement is a negative number [#44786](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44786) @[xhebox](https://github.com/xhebox)
    - Fix the issue that queries might return incorrect results when `tidb_opt_agg_push_down` is enabled [#44795](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44795) @[AilinKid](https://github.com/AilinKid)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue of result correctness that occurs when a query with `current_date()` uses execution plan cache [#45086](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45086) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)

```

Reviewer 3: 直接在你的 comment 里更新了

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2023

TiDB version: 7.3.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.3.0#version-list)

7.3.0 introduces the following major features. In addition to that, 7.3.0 also includes a series of enhancements (described in the [Feature details](#feature-details) section) to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These enhancements are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in the following table.

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Scalability and Performance</td>

>     <td>TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>
>     <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/partitioned-raft-kv">Partitioned Raft KV</a> architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td>TiDB Lightning supports <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/partitioned-raft-kv">Partitioned Raft KV</a> (experimental)</td>
    <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new Partitioned Raft KV architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.
```

    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on imports</a></td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on data imports</a></td>
```

>     <td>The TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports a new version of conflict detection, which implements the semantics of replacing (`replace`) or ignoring (`ignore`) conflict data when encountering conflicts. It automatically handles conflict data for you while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td>The TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports a new version of conflict detection, which implements the semantics of replacing (<code>replace</code>) or ignoring (<code>ignore</code>) conflict data when encountering conflicts. It automatically handles conflict data for you while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-resource-control#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>

>     <td>Query timeouts might occur on any TiKV node but now resource groups can manage queries by global parallel execution time and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to mark target queries by exact SQL text, SQL digest, or plan digest and deal with the queries at a resource group level, this feature gives you much more control over the potential impact of unexpected large queries on a cluster.</td>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    <td>Query might behave beyond expectation but now resource groups can manage queries with a watch list and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to mark target queries by exact SQL text, SQL digest, or plan digest and deal with the queries at a resource group level, this feature gives you much more control over the potential impact of unexpected large queries on a cluster.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>SQL</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/optimizer-hints">Enhance operator control over query stability by adding more optimizer hints to the query planner</a></td>

>     <td>Added hints: <code>NO_INDEX_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_HASH_JOIN()</code>,  <code>NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()</code>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <td>Added hints: <code>NO_INDEX_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_HASH_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()</code>
```

  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Feature details

### Performance

* TiFlash supports the replica selection strategy [#44106](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44106) @[XuHuaiyu](https://github.com/XuHuaiyu) **tw@qiancai** <!--1394-->

    Before v7.3.0, TiFlash uses replicas from all its nodes for data scanning and MPP calculations to maximize performance. Starting from v7.3.0, TiFlash introduces the replica selection strategy and lets you configure it using the [`tiflash_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730) system variable. This strategy supports selecting specific replicas based on the [zone attributes](/schedule-replicas-by-topology-labels.md#optional-configure-labels-for-tidb) of nodes and scheduling specific nodes for data scanning and MPP calculations.

    For a cluster that is deployed in multiple data centers and each data center has complete TiFlash data replicas, you can configure this strategy to only select TiFlash replicas from the current data center. This means data scanning and MPP calculations are performed only on TiFlash nodes in the current data center, which avoids excessive network data transmission across data centers.

>     For more information，see [documentation](/system-variables.md/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/system-variables.md/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730).
```

* TiFlash supports Runtime Filter within nodes [#40220](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40220) @[elsa0520](https://github.com/elsa0520) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1130-->

    Runtime Filter is a **dynamic predicate** generated during the query planning phase. In the process of table joining, these dynamic predicates can effectively filter out rows that do not meet the join conditions, reducing scan time and network overhead, and improving the efficiency of table joining. Starting from v7.3.0, TiFlash supports Runtime Filter within nodes, improving the overall performance of analytical queries. In some TPC-DS workloads, the performance can be improved by 10% to 50%.

    This feature is disabled by default in v7.3.0. To enable this feature, set the system variable [`tidb_runtime_filter_mode`](/system-variables.md#tidb_runtime_filter_mode-new-in-v720) to `LOCAL`.

>     For more information, refer to [user documentation](/runtime-filter.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/runtime-filter.md).
```

    This feature is experimental and is disabled by default. It is controlled by the system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution-new-in-v720).

### Reliability

* Add new optimizer hints [#45520](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45520) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)

    In v7.3.0, TiDB introduces several new optimizer hints to control the join methods between tables, including:

    - [`NO_MERGE_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_merge_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than merge join.
    - [`NO_INDEX_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than index nested loop join.
    - [`NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_merge_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than index nested loop merge join.
    - [`NO_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than hash join.
    - [`NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_index_hash_joint1_name--tl_name-) selects join methods other than [index nested loop hash join](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join).

>     For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints.md).
```

>     For more information, refer to [user documentation](/optimizer-hints).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/optimizer-hints).
```

    In v7.2.0, TiDB automatically manages queries that use resources more than expected (Runaway Query) by automatically downgrading or canceling runaway queries. In actual practice, rules alone cannot cover all cases. Therefore, TiDB v7.3.0 introduces the ability to manually mark runaway queries. With the new command [`QUERY WATCH`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-query-watch.md), you can mark runaway queries based on SQL text, SQL Digest, or execution plan, and the marked runaway queries can be downgraded or cancelled.

    This feature provides an effective intervention method for sudden performance issues in the database. For performance issues caused by queries, before identifying the root cause, this feature can quickly alleviate its impact on overall performance, thereby improving system service quality.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters).

### SQL

* List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions [#20679](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/20679) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) @[bb7133](https://github.com/bb7133) **tw@qiancai** <!--1342-->

>     Before v7.3.0, when you use the `INSERT` statement to insert data into List or List COLUMNS partitioned tables, the data needs to meet the specified partitioning conditions of the table. If the data to be inserted does not meet any of these conditions, either the execution of the statement will fail or the non-compliant data will be ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before v7.3.0, when you use the `INSERT` statement to insert data into a List or List COLUMNS partitioned table, the data needs to meet the specified partitioning conditions of the table. If the data to be inserted does not meet any of these conditions, either the execution of the statement will fail or the non-compliant data will be ignored.
```

   Starting from v7.3.0, List and List COLUMNS partitioned tables support default partitions. After a default partition is created, if the data to be inserted does not meet any partitioning condition, it will be written to the default partition. This feature improves the usability of List and List COLUMNS partitioning, avoiding the execution failure of the `INSERT` statement or data being ignored due to data that does not meet partitioning conditions.

    Note that this feature is a TiDB extension to MySQL syntax. For a partitioned table with a default partition, the data in the table cannot be directly replicated to MySQL.

    For more information, see [documentation](/partitioned-table.md#list-partitioning).

> ### DB operations
> 
> - note 1
> 
> - note 2
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Observability

* Show the progress of collecting statistics [#44033](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44033) @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1380-->

    Collecting statistics for large tables often takes a long time. In previous versions, you cannot see the progress of collecting statistics, and therefore cannot predict the completion time. TiDB v7.3.0 introduces a feature to show the progress of collecting statistics. You can view the overall workload, current progress, and estimated completion time for each subtask using the system table `mysql.analyze_jobs` or `SHOW ANALYZE STATUS`. In scenarios such as large-scale data import and SQL performance optimization, this feature helps you understand the overall task progress and improves the user experience.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-analyze-status.md).

* Plan Replayer supports exporting historical statistics [#45038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45038) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1445-->

>     Starting from v7.3.0, with the newly added [`dump with stats as of timestamp`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) clause, Plan Replayer can export the statistics of specified SQL-related objects at a specific point in time. During the diagnosis of execution plan issues, accurately capturing historical statistics can help analyze more precisely how the execution plan was generated at the time when the issue occurred. This helps identify the root cause of the issue and greatly improves efficiency in diagnosing execution plan issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Starting from v7.3.0, with the newly added [`dump with stats as of timestamp`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) clause, You can use Plan Replayer to export the statistics of specified SQL-related objects at a specific point in time. During the diagnosis of execution plan issues, accurately capturing historical statistics can help analyze more precisely how the execution plan was generated at the time when the issue occurred. This helps identify the root cause of the issue and greatly improves efficiency in diagnosing execution plan issues.
```

>     For more information, refer to [user documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md).
```

    TiDB Lightning now supports Partitioned Raft KV. This feature helps improve the data import performance of TiDB Lightning.

* TiDB Lightning introduces a new parameter `enable-diagnose-log` to enhance troubleshooting by printing more diagnostic logs [#45497](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45497) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)

    By default, this feature is disabled and TiDB Lightning only prints logs containing `lightning/main`. When enabled, TiDB Lightning prints logs for all packages (including `client-go` and `tidb`) to help diagnose issues related to `client-go` and `tidb`.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-global).

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v7.2.0 to the current version (v7.3.0). If you are upgrading from v7.1.0 or earlier versions to the current version, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.

### Behavior changes

> 

Author: ```suggestion

* Backup & Restore (BR) 

    - BR adds an empty cluster check before performing a full data restoration. By default, restoring data to a non-empty cluster is not allowed. If you want to force the restoration, you can use the `--filter` option to specify the corresponding table name to restore data to.
```

> > **注意：**
> >
> > 以下为从 v7.1.0 升级至当前版本 (v7.2.0) 所需兼容性变更信息。如果从 v7.0.0 或之前版本升级到当前版本，可能也需要考虑和查看中间版本 release notes 中提到的兼容性变更信息。

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:**
>
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v7.2.0 to the current version (v7.3.0). If you are upgrading from v7.1.0 or earlier versions to the current version, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.
```

| TiKV | [`rocksdb.lockcf.write-buffer-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#write-buffer-size) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to speed up compaction on lockcf, TiKV changes the default value from `"32MB"` to `"4MB"`. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.format_version`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) | Modified | Introduces a new DTFile format `format_version = 5` to reduce the number of physical files by merging smaller files. Note that this format is experimental and not enabled by default. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.max-record-rows` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It controls the maximum number of rows in the `conflict_records` table. The default value is 100. |

> |TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.strategy` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data.  It includes the following options: "" (TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data), `error` (terminate the import and report an error if a primary or unique key conflict is detected in the imported data), `replace` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the new data is retained and the old data is overwritten.), `ignore` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the old data is retained and the new data is ignored.). The default value is "", that is, TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.strategy` | Newly added | The new version of strategy to handle conflicting data. It includes the following options: "" (TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data), `error` (terminate the import and report an error if a primary or unique key conflict is detected in the imported data), `replace` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the new data is retained and the old data is overwritten.), `ignore` (when encountering data with conflicting primary or unique keys, the old data is retained and the new data is ignored.). The default value is "", that is, TiDB Lightning does not detect and process conflicting data. |
```

|TiDB Lightning  | `conflict.threshold` | Newly added | Controls the upper limit of the conflicting data. When `conflict.strategy="error"`, the default value is `0`. When `conflict.strategy="replace”` or `conflict.strategy=“ignore"`, you can set it as a maxint. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `enable-diagnose-logs` | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the diagnostic logs. The default value is `false`, that is, only the logs related to the import are output, and the logs of other dependent components are not output. When you set it to `true`, logs from both the import process and other dependent components are output, and GRPC debugging is enabled, which can be used for diagnosis. |

> |TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` | Deprecated | Controls action to do when trying to insert a conflicting record in the logical import mode. Startign from v7.3.0, this parameter is replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` | Deprecated | Controls action to do when trying to insert a conflicting record in the logical import mode. Starting from v7.3.0, this parameter is replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task). |
```

> |TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused.  **tw:qiancai**  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused. |
```

### System tables

- Add a new system table `mysql.tidb_timers` to store the metadata of internal timers.

## Improvements

+ TiDB <!-- Oreoxmt -->

    - Introduce a new system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) to control whether the `EXPLAIN` statement executes subqueries in advance during the optimization phase [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--983-->
    - When [Global Kill](/tidb-configuration-file#enable-global-kill-new-in-v610) is enabled, you can terminate the current session by pressing <kbd>Control+C</kbd> [#8854](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8854) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) **tw@Oreoxmt**
    - Support the `IS_FREE_LOCK()` and `IS_USED_LOCK()` locking functions [#44493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44493) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
    - Optimize the performance of reading the dumped chunks from disk [#45125](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45125) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)

+ TiKV <!-- Oreoxmt -->

>     - Add the `Max gap of safe-ts` and `Min safe ts region` metrics and introduce the `tikv-ctl get_region_read_progress` command to better observe and diagnose the status of resolved-ts and safe-ts [#15082](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15082) [@ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Add the `Max gap of safe-ts` and `Min safe ts region` metrics and introduce the `tikv-ctl get_region_read_progress` command to better observe and diagnose the status of resolved-ts and safe-ts [#15082](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15082) @[ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)
```

    - Fix the issue that an error occurs when using a wrong partition table name [#44967](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44967) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i)
    - Fix the issue that creating indexes gets stuck when `tidb_enable_dist_task` is enabled in some cases [#44440](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44440) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the `duplicate entry` error that occurs when restoring a table with `AUTO_ID_CACHE=1` using BR [#44716](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44716) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
    - Fix the issue that the time consumed for executing `TRUNCATE TABLE` is inconsistent with the task execution time shown in `ADMIN SHOW DDL JOBS` [#44785](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44785) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that upgrading TiDB gets stuck when reading metadata takes longer than one DDL lease [#45176](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45176) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala)

+ TiKV <!-- Oreoxmt -->

>     - Fix the issue that reading data during GC might cause TiKV panic in some rare cases [#15109](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15109) [@MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that reading data during GC might cause TiKV panic in some rare cases [#15109](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15109) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
```

+ PD

    - Fix the issue that restarting PD might cause the `default` resource group to be reinitialized [#6787](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6787) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv)
    - Fix the issue that when etcd is already started but the client has not yet connected to it, calling the client might cause PD to panic [#6860](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6860) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp)
    - Fix the issue that the `health-check` output of a Region is inconsistent with the Region information returned by querying the Region ID [#6560](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6560) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato)
    - Fix the issue that failed learner peers in `unsafe recovery` are ignored in `auto-detect` mode [#6690](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6690) @[v01dstar](https://github.com/v01dstar)
    - Fix the issue that Placement Rules select TiFlash learners that do not meet the rules [#6662](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6662) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)

>     - Fix the issue that unhealthy peers cannot be removed when rule checker selects peers [#6559](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6559) [nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that unhealthy peers cannot be removed when rule checker selects peers [#6559](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6559) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)
```

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2023

TiDB version: 7.3.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.3.0#version-list)

> 7.3.0 introduces the following major feature as generally available. The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:

Author: ```suggestion
7.3.0 introduces the following major features. The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:
```

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>

>     <td rowspan="1">Scalability and Performance</td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td>Scalability and Performance</td>
```

    <td>TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>
    <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new Partitioned Raft KV architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on imports</td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on imports</a></td>
```

    <td>The TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports the new version of conflict detection and implementing the semantics of replacing (`replace`) or ignoring (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicts. It automatically handles conflicting data for you while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>
```

    <td>Query timeouts exist on a per-TiKV node basis but now Resource Groups can manage queries by global parallel execution time and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to mark target queries by SQL manually Text, SQL Digest or Plan Digest and what do with the queries at a Resource Group level, gives them much more control over the impact unexpected large queries may have on the cluster.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>SQL</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/optimizer-hints">Enhanced operator control over query stability by adding more complex optimizer hints to the query planner</a></td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/optimizer-hints">Enhanced operator control over query stability by adding more complex optimizer hints to the query planner</a></td>
```

    <td>Added hints: <code>NO_INDEX_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_HASH_JOIN()</code>,  <code>NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()</code>

>   <tr>

Author: ```suggestion
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
```

    <td>DB Operations and Observability</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/sql-statement-show-analyze-status">Show the progress of statistics collection tasks</a></td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/sql-statement-show-analyze-status">Show the progress of statistics collection tasks</a></td>
```

### System variables

| 变量名  | 修改类型（包括新增/修改/删除）    | 描述 |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls whether the `EXPLAIN` statement disables the execution of constant subqueries that can be expanded at the optimization stage.  |
| [`tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery-从-v610-版本开始引入) | 修改 | 经进一步的测试后，该变量默认值从 `OFF` 修改为 `ON`，即优化器改写会移除子查询中的 `ORDER BY` 子句。 |
| [`tiflash_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls the strategy for selecting TiFlash replicas when a query requires the TiFlash engine. |
|        |                              |      |
|        |                              |      |

### Configuration file parameters

| 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiDB | [`enable-32bits-connection-id`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-32bits-connection-id-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the 32-bit connection ID feature. |

> | TiKV | [<code>rocksdb.\[defaultcf\|writecf\|lockcf\].compaction-guard-min-output-file-size</code>](/tikv-configuration-file.md#compaction-guard-min-output-file-size) | Modified | Changes the default value from `"1MB"` to `"8MB"` to resolve the issue that compaction speed cannot keep up with the write speed during large data writes. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`coprocessor.region-bucket-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#region-bucket-size-new-in-v610) | Modified | Changes the default value from `96MiB` to `50MiB`. |
| TiKV | [<code>rocksdb.\[defaultcf\|writecf\|lockcf\].compaction-guard-min-output-file-size</code>](/tikv-configuration-file.md#compaction-guard-min-output-file-size) | Modified | Changes the default value from `"1MB"` to `"8MB"` to resolve the issue that compaction speed cannot keep up with the write speed during large data writes. |
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-analyze-status.md).

* Plan Replayer supports exporting historical statistics [#45038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45038) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1445-->

    Starting from v7.3.0, with the newly added [`dump with stats as of timestamp`](/sql-plan-replayer.md) clause, Plan Replayer can export the statistics of specified SQL-related objects at a specific point in time. During the diagnosis of execution plan issues, accurately capturing historical statistics can help analyze more precisely how the execution plan was generated at the time when the issue occurred. This helps identify the root cause of the issue and greatly improves efficiency in diagnosing execution plan issues.

    For more information, refer to [user documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md).

### Data migration

* TiDB Lightning introduces a new version of conflict data detection and handling strategy [#41629](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41629) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@hfxsd** <!--1296-->

>     In previous versions, TiDB Lightning uses different conflict detection and handling methods for Logical Import Mode and Physical Import Mode, which are complex to configure and not easy for users to understand. In addition, Physical Import Mode cannot handle conflicts using the `replace` or `ignore` policy. Starting from v7.3.0, TiDB Lightning introduces a unified conflict detection and handling strategy for both Logical Import Mode and Physical Import Mode. You can choose to report an error (`error`), replace (`replace`) or ignore (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicts. You can limit the number of conflict records, such as the task is interrupted and terminated after processing a specified number of conflict records. Furthermore, the system can record conflicting data for troubleshooting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In previous versions, TiDB Lightning uses different conflict detection and handling methods for Logical Import Mode and Physical Import Mode, which are complex to configure and not easy for users to understand. In addition, Physical Import Mode cannot handle conflicts using the `replace` or `ignore` strategy. Starting from v7.3.0, TiDB Lightning introduces a unified conflict detection and handling strategy for both Logical Import Mode and Physical Import Mode. You can choose to report an error (`error`), replace (`replace`) or ignore (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicts. You can limit the number of conflict records, such as the task is interrupted and terminated after processing a specified number of conflict records. Furthermore, the system can record conflicting data for troubleshooting.
```

>     For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Compared with the old version, the new version can improve the performance of conflict detection and processing by up to three times. Note that this performance value is laboratory data for reference only. The actual data might vary depending on the your environment configuration, table structure, and the percentage of conflict data. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.
```

>     For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For import data with many conflicts, it is recommended to use the new version of the conflict detection and handling strategy for better performance. In the lab environment, the new version strategy can improve the performance of conflict detection and handling up to three times faster than the old version. This performance value is for reference only. The actual performance might vary depending on your configuration, table structure, and the percentage of conflicting data. Note that the new version and the old version of the conflict strategy cannot be used at the same time. The old conflict detection and handling strategy will be deprecated in the future.
```

| TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | The encoding method of binary data, which can be `'base64'` or `'hex'`. The default value is `'base64'`. |

### 系统表

- 新增系统表 `mysql.tidb_timers` 用来存储系统内部定时器的元信息。
	
## Deprecated features

- note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    <!-- Oreoxmt -->
    - Introduce a new system variable [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) to control whether the `EXPLAIN` statement executes subqueries in advance during the optimization phase [#22076](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/22076) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--983-->
    - When [Global Kill](/tidb-configuration-file#enable-global-kill-new-in-v610) is enabled, you can terminate the current session by pressing <kbd>Control+C</kbd> [#8854](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/8854) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     - Support the `IS_USED_LOCK()` locking function [#44493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44493) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Support the `IS_FREE_LOCK()` and `IS_USED_LOCK()` locking functions [#44493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44493) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
```

+ TiKV

    <!-- Oreoxmt -->
    - Add the `Max gap of safe-ts` and `Min safe ts region` metrics and introduce the `tikv-ctl get_region_read_progress` command to better observe and diagnose the status of resolved-ts and safe-ts [#15082](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15082) [@ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - Support a new DTFile format version to reduce the number of physical files (experimental) [#7595](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7595) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan) **tw@qiancai** <!--？-->
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - When backing up data to Azure Blob Storage using BR, you can specify either an encryption scope or an encryption key for server-side encryption [#45025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45025) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1385-->
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

> 

Author: ```suggestion

        <!-- ran-huang -->
        - Optimize the message size output using the Open Protocol to make it include only the updated column values when sending `UPDATE` type events [#9336](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9336) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
        - Storage Sink now supports hexadecimal encoding for HEX formatted data, making it compatible with AWS DMS format specifications [#9373](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9373) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
```

>         - Kafka Sink supports sending only handle key data when the message is too large, reducing the size of the message [#9382](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9382) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1406-->

Author: ```suggestion
        - Kafka Sink supports [sending only handle key data](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) when the message is too large, reducing the size of the message [#9382](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9382) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1406-->
```

    - Fix the issue that `resolve lock` might hang when there is a sudden change in PD time [#44822](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44822) @[zyguan](https://github.com/zyguan)
    - Fix the issue that the GC Resolve Locks step might miss some pessimistic locks [#45134](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45134) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
    - Fix the issue that the query with `ORDER BY` returns incorrect results in dynamic pruning mode [#45007](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45007) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)

+ TiKV

    <!-- Oreoxmt -->
    - Fix the issue that in some rare cases, reading data during GC might cause TiKV panic [#15109](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15109) [@MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
        <!-- ran-huang -->
        - Fix the issue that changefeeds would fail due to the temporary unavailability of PD [#9294](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9294) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)
        - Fix the data inconsistency issue that might occur when some TiCDC nodes were isolated from the network [#9344](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9344) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - Fix the issue that when Kafka Sink encounters errors it might indefinitely block changefeed progress [#9309](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9309) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)
        - Fix the panic issue that might occur when the TiCDC node status changes [#9354](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9354) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)
        - Fix the encoding error for the default `ENUM` values [#9259](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9259) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that executing checksum after TiDB Lightning completes import might encounter SSL errors [#45462](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45462) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)
```

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

> Release date: August 10, 2023

Author: ```suggestion
Release date: August 14, 2023
```

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2023

TiDB version: 7.3.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.3.0#version-list)

> 7.3.0 introduces the following major features. The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7.3.0 introduces the following major features:
```

Reviewer: Suggest to move "The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights" after the table because it is just a supplementary description of the table

> 7.3.0 introduces the following major features. The rest of the release (detailed in the Details section) was a series of enhancements to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7.3.0 introduces the following major features. In addition to that, 7.3.0 also includes various improvement features (described in the [Feature details](#feature-details) section) to enhance query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash.
```

Reviewer: "These are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in this section dedicated to release highlights:" is not needed and it distracts user attention.

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td>TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>
    <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new Partitioned Raft KV architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on imports</a></td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage#conflict-detection">Add automatic conflict detection and resolution on imports</a></td>
```

>     <td>The TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports the new version of conflict detection and implementing the semantics of replacing (`replace`) or ignoring (`ignore`) conflicting data when encountering conflicts. It automatically handles conflicting data for you while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td>The TiDB Lightning Physical Import Mode supports a new version of conflict detection, which implements the semantics of replacing (`replace`) or ignoring (`ignore`) conflict data when encountering conflicts. It automatically handles conflict data for you while improving the performance of conflict resolution.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-resource-control.md#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/tidb-resource-control#query-watch-parameters">Manual management of runaway queries </a>(experimental)</td>
```

>     <td>Query timeouts exist on a per-TiKV node basis but now Resource Groups can manage queries by global parallel execution time and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to mark target queries by SQL manually Text, SQL Digest or Plan Digest and what do with the queries at a Resource Group level, gives them much more control over the impact unexpected large queries may have on the cluster.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td>Query timeouts might occur on any TiKV node but now resource groups can manage queries by global parallel execution time and either deprioritize or kill them. Allowing operators to mark target queries by exact SQL text, SQL digest, or plan digest and deal with the queries at a Resource Group level, this feature gives you much more control over the potential impact of unexpected large queries on a cluster.</td>
```

>   </tr>

Reviewer: What does "global parallel execution time" mean? It is not mentioned in https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/tidb-resource-control#query-watch-parameters.

Reviewer 7: It's from criteria of runaway management. I updated the description and make it more focused on manual management part. PTAL.

Reviewer: LGTM

  <tr>
    <td>SQL</td>

>     <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/optimizer-hints">Enhanced operator control over query stability by adding more complex optimizer hints to the query planner</a></td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/optimizer-hints">Enhance operator control over query stability by adding more optimizer hints to the query planner</a></td>
```

    <td>Added hints: <code>NO_INDEX_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_INDEX_MERGE_JOIN()</code>, <code>NO_HASH_JOIN()</code>,  <code>NO_INDEX_HASH_JOIN()</code>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>DB Operations and Observability</td>
    <td><a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/sql-statement-show-analyze-status">Show the progress of statistics collection tasks</a></td>

>     <td>Support viewing the progress of <code>ANALYZE</code> tasks using <code>SHOW ANALYZE STATUS</code> or through the system table <code>mysql.analyze_jobs</code>.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td>Support viewing the progress of <code>ANALYZE</code> tasks using the <code>SHOW ANALYZE STATUS</code> statement or through the <code>mysql.analyze_jobs</code> system table.</td>
```

### Behavior changes

<!-- 此小节包含 MySQL 兼容性变更-->

* TiDB Lightning **tw@hfxsd**

    - `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` is deprecated and replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).
    - The `max-error` parameter, which controls the maximum number of non-fatal errors that TiDB Lightning can tolerate before stopping the migration task, no longer limits import data conflicts. The [`conflict.threshold`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) parameter now controls the maximum number of conflicting records that can be tolerated.

* TiCDC **tw@ran-huang**

    - When Kafka sink uses Avro protocol, if the `force-replicate` parameter is set to `true`, TiCDC reports an error when creating a changefeed.
    - Due to incompatibility between `delete-only-output-handle-key-columns` and `force-replicate` parameters, when both parameters are enabled, TiCDC reports an error when creating a changefeed.
    - When the output protocol is Open Protocol, the `UPDATE` events only output the changed columns.

### System variables

> | 变量名  | 修改类型（包括新增/修改/删除）    | 描述 |

Author: ```suggestion
| Variable name | Change type | Description |
```

|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_non_eval_scalar_subquery-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls whether the `EXPLAIN` statement disables the execution of constant subqueries that can be expanded at the optimization stage.  |
| [`tidb_skip_missing_partition_stats`](/system-variables.md#tidb_skip_missing_partition_stats-new-in-v730) | Newly added | This variable controls the generation of GlobalStats when partition statistics are missing. |

> | [`tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery`](/system-variables.md#tidb_remove_orderby_in_subquery-从-v610-版本开始引入) | 修改 | 经进一步的测试后，该变量默认值从 `OFF` 修改为 `ON`，即优化器改写会移除子查询中的 `ORDER BY` 子句。 |

Author: ```suggestion
```

| [`tiflash_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read-new-in-v730) | Newly added | Controls the strategy for selecting TiFlash replicas when a query requires the TiFlash engine. |

> |        |                              |      |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution`](/system-variables.md#tidb_opt_enable_mpp_shared_cte_execution-new-in-v720) | Modified | This system variable takes effect starting from v7.3.0. It controls whether non-recursive Common Table Expressions (CTEs) can be executed in TiFlash MPP. |
```

> |        |                              |      |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_lock_unchanged_keys`](/system-variables.md#tiflash_replica_read#tidb_lock_unchanged_keys-new-in-v711-and-v730) | Newly added | This variable is used to control in certain scenarios whether to lock the keys that are involved but not modified in a transaction. |
```

### Configuration file parameters

> | 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |

Author: ```suggestion
| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
```

| TiKV | [`storage.block-cache.capacity`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#capacity) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to compensate for the memory overhead of memtables, TiKV changes the default value from 45% to 30% of the size of total system memory. |
| TiKV | [`rocksdb.write-buffer-limit`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#write-buffer-limit-new-in-v660) | Modified | To reduce the memory overhead of memtables, when `storage.engine="raft-kv"`, TiKV changes the default value from 25% of the memory of the machine to `0`, which means no limit. When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), TiKV changes the default value from 25% to 20% of the memory of the machine. |
| TiKV | [`rocksdb.lockcf.write-buffer-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#write-buffer-size) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to speed up compaction on lockcf, TiKV changes the default value from `"32MB"` to `"4MB"`. |

> | TiFlash | [`storage.format_version`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) | Modified | Introduces a new DTFile format `format_version = 5` to reduce the number of physical files by merging smaller files. Note that this format is experimental and not enabled by default.

Author: ```suggestion
| TiFlash | [`storage.format_version`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) | Modified | Introduces a new DTFile format `format_version = 5` to reduce the number of physical files by merging smaller files. Note that this format is experimental and not enabled by default. |
```

|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.on-duplicate` | Deprecated | Controls action to do when trying to insert a conflicting record in the logical import mode. Startign from v7.3.0, this parameter is replaced by [`conflict.strategy`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task). |
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.incremental-import` | Deleted | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. Because it could easily be mistaken as an incremental import parameter, this parameter is now renamed to `tikv-importer.parallel-import`. If a user passes in the old parameter name, it will be automatically converted to the new one. |
|TiDB Lightning  | `tikv-importer.parallel-import` | Newly added | TiDB Lightning parallel import parameter. It replaces the existing `tikv-importer.incremental-import` parameter, which could be mistaken as an incremental import parameter and misused.  **tw:qiancai** <!--1516--> |

> | Data Migration | `strict-optimistic-shard-mode` | 新增 | 用于兼容历史版本 2.0 分库分表同步 DDL 的行为。当用户选择乐观模式时，可以启用该参数，开启后，乐观模式下，同步任务遇到二类 DDL 时，整个任务会中断，在多个表的 DDL变更有依赖关系的场景，可以及时中断，用户手动处理完各表的 DDL 后，再继续同步数据，保障上下游数据的一致性。 **tw@ran-huang** <!--1414-->|

Author: ```suggestion
|BR  | azblob.encryption-scope | Newly added | BR provides encryption scope support for Azure Blob Storage. |
|BR  | azblob.encryption-key | Newly added | BR provides encryption key support for Azure Blob Storage. |
```

| TiCDC | [`large-message-handle-option`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) | Newly added | Empty by default, which means that when the message size exceeds the limit of Kafka topic, the changefeed fails. When this configuration is set to `"handle-key-only"`, if the message exceeds the size limit, only the handle key will be sent to reduce the message size; if the reduced message still exceeds the limit, then the changefeed fails. |
| TiCDC | [`sink.csv.binary-encoding-method`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | The encoding method of binary data, which can be `'base64'` or `'hex'`. The default value is `'base64'`. |

> ### 系统表

Author: ```suggestion
### System tables
```

> - 新增系统表 `mysql.tidb_timers` 用来存储系统内部定时器的元信息。

Author: ```suggestion
- Add a new system table `mysql.tidb_timers` to store the metadata of internal timers.
```

> ## Deprecated features
> 
> - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

+ PD <!-- qiancai -->

    - Support blocking the Swagger API by default when the Swagger server is not enabled [#6786](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6786) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)
    - Improve the high availability of etcd [#6554](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6554) [#6442](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6442) @[lhy1024](https://github.com/lhy1024)
    - Reduce the memory consumption of `GetRegions` requests [#6835](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6835) @[lhy1024](https://github.com/lhy1024)

+ TiFlash <!-- qiancai -->

    - Support a new DTFile format version [`storage.format_version = 5`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) to reduce the number of physical files (experimental) [#7595](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7595) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - When backing up data to Azure Blob Storage using BR, you can specify either an encryption scope or an encryption key for server-side encryption [#45025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45025) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth) **tw@Oreoxmt** <!--1385-->

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
```

    + TiCDC <!-- ran-huang -->

>         - Optimize the message size output using the Open Protocol to make it include only the updated column values when sending `UPDATE` type events [#9336](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9336) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Optimize the message size of the Open Protocol output to make it include only the updated column values when sending `UPDATE` events [#9336](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9336) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)
```

        - Storage Sink now supports hexadecimal encoding for HEX formatted data, making it compatible with AWS DMS format specifications [#9373](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9373) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - Kafka Sink supports [sending only handle key data](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#handle-messages-that-exceed-the-kafka-topic-limit) when the message is too large, reducing the size of the message [#9382](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9382) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand) **tw@ran-huang** <!--1406-->

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     + TiDB Data Migration (DM)
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     + TiDB Lightning
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 
>     + TiUP
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
```

    - Fix the issue that Placement Rules select TiFlash learners that do not meet the rules [#6662](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6662) @[rleungx](https://github.com/rleungx)
    - Fix the issue that unhealthy peers cannot be removed when rule checker selects peers [#6559](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6559) [nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

+ TiFlash <!-- qiancai -->

    - Fix the issue that TiFlash cannot replicate partitioned tables successfully due to deadlocks [#7758](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7758) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)
    - Fix the issue that the `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_REPLICA` system table contains tables that users do not have privileges to access [#7795](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7795) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger)
    - Fix the issue that when there are multiple HashAgg operators within the same MPP task, the compilation of the MPP task might take an excessively long time, severely affecting query performance [#7810](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7810) @[SeaRise](https://github.com/SeaRise)

+ Tools

>     + Backup & Restore (BR)
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    + TiCDC <!-- ran-huang -->

        - Fix the issue that changefeeds would fail due to the temporary unavailability of PD [#9294](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9294) @[asddongmen](https://github.com/asddongmen)

>         - Fix the data inconsistency issue that might occur when some TiCDC nodes were isolated from the network [#9344](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9344) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Fix the data inconsistency issue that might occur when some TiCDC nodes are isolated from the network [#9344](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9344) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
```

        - Fix the issue that when Kafka Sink encounters errors it might indefinitely block changefeed progress [#9309](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9309) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)
        - Fix the panic issue that might occur when the TiCDC node status changes [#9354](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9354) @[sdojjy](https://github.com/sdojjy)
        - Fix the encoding error for the default `ENUM` values [#9259](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/9259) @[3AceShowHand](https://github.com/3AceShowHand)

> 
>     + TiDB Data Migration (DM)
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
```

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - Fix the issue that executing checksum after TiDB Lightning completes import might encounter SSL errors [#45462](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45462) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that executing checksum after TiDB Lightning completes import might get SSL errors [#45462](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45462) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)
```

>     + TiUP
> 
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

    - Fix the TiDB panic issue caused by data race [#45561](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45561) @[genliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi)
    - Fix the hang-up issue that occurs when queries with `indexMerge` are killed [#45279](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45279) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008)
    - Fix the issue that query results in MPP mode are incorrect when `tidb_enable_parallel_apply` is enabled [#45299](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45299) @[windtalker](https://github.com/windtalker)
    - Fix the issue that `resolve lock` might hang when there is a sudden change in PD time [#44822](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44822) @[zyguan](https://github.com/zyguan)
    - Fix the issue that the GC Resolve Locks step might miss some pessimistic locks [#45134](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45134) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
    - Fix the issue that the query with `ORDER BY` returns incorrect results in dynamic pruning mode [#45007](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45007) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)

>     - Fix the issue that `AUTO_INCREMENT` and the default value cannot coexist in the column definition [#45136](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45136) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
>     - Fix the issue that in some scenarios, querying the system table `information_schema.TIKV_REGION_STATUS` returns incorrect results [#45531](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45531) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
>     - Fix the issue of incorrect partition pruning of partition table partitions in some scenarios [#42273](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42273) @[jiyfhust](https://github.com/jiyfhust)
>     - Fix the issue that global indexes cannot be cleared when executing `TRUNCATE` to truncate a certain partition of a partitioned table [#42435](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42435) @[L-maple](https://github.com/L-maple)
>     - Fix the issue that in some scenarios unfinished TTL tasks cannot be re-executed after TiDB restarts [#45022](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45022) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
>     - Fix the memory leak issue when TTL is running [#45510](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45510) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
>     - Fix the issue of inaccurate error messages when inserting data into partitioned tables [#44966](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44966) @[lilinghai](https://github.com/lilinghai)
>     - Fix the read permission issue on the `information_schema.tiflash_replica` table [#7795](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7795) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger)
>     - Fix the issue that an error occurs when using the wrong partition table name [#44967](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44967) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i)
>     - Fix the issue that in some scenarios creating indexes gets stuck when `tidb_enable_dist_task` is enabled [#44440](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44440) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
>     - Fix the issue that using BR to recover a table with `AUTO_ID_CACHE = 1` causes the `Duplicate entry` error [#44716](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44716) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
>     - Fix the issue that the time consumed for executing `TRUNCATE TABLE` is not consistent with the task execution time shown in the `ADMIN SHOW DDL JOBS` result [#44785](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44785) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
>     - Fix the issue that upgrading TiDB gets stuck when reading metadata takes longer than one DDL lease [#45176](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45176) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that `AUTO_INCREMENT` can be specified on the same column with the `DEFAULT` column value [#45136](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45136) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that querying the system table `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIKV_REGION_STATUS` returns incorrect results in some cases [#45531](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45531) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue of incorrect partition table pruning in some cases [#42273](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42273) @[jiyfhust](https://github.com/jiyfhust)
    - Fix the issue that global indexes are not cleared when truncating partition of a partitioned table [#42435](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/42435) @[L-maple](https://github.com/L-maple)
    - Fix the issue that other TiDB nodes do not take over TTL tasks after failures in one TiDB node [#45022](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45022) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
    - Fix the memory leak issue when TTL is running [#45510](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45510) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
    - Fix the issue of inaccurate error messages when inserting data into partitioned tables [#44966](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44966) @[lilinghai](https://github.com/lilinghai)
    - Fix the read permission issue on the `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_REPLICA` table [#7795](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7795) @[Lloyd-Pottiger](https://github.com/Lloyd-Pottiger)
    - Fix the issue that an error occurs when using a wrong partition table name [#44967](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44967) @[River2000i](https://github.com/River2000i)
    - Fix the issue that creating indexes gets stuck when `tidb_enable_dist_task` is enabled in some cases [#44440](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44440) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the `duplicate entry` error that occurs when restoring a table with `AUTO_ID_CACHE=1` using BR [#44716](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44716) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
    - Fix the issue that the time consumed for executing `TRUNCATE TABLE` is inconsistent with the task execution time shown in `ADMIN SHOW DDL JOBS` [#44785](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/44785) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that upgrading TiDB gets stuck when reading metadata takes longer than one DDL lease [#45176](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45176) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala)
```

    
+ TiKV

    <!-- Oreoxmt -->

>     - Fix the issue that in some rare cases, reading data during GC might cause TiKV panic [#15109](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15109) [@MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that reading data during GC might cause TiKV panic in some rare cases [#15109](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15109) [@MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
```

---
title: TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 7.3.0.
---

# TiDB 7.3.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx xx, 2023

TiDB version: 7.3.0

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation packages](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v7.3.0#version-list)

7.3.0 introduces the following major features. In addition to that, 7.3.0 also includes a series of enhancements (described in the [Feature details](#feature-details) section) to query stability in TiDB server and TiFlash. These enhancements are more miscellaneous in nature and not user-facing so they are not included in the following table.

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Scalability and Performance</td>
    <td>TiDB Lightning supports Partitioned Raft KV </td>

>     <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new [Partitioned Raft KV](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/partitioned-raft-kv) architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <td>TiDB Lightning now supports the new <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v7.3/partitioned-raft-kv">Partitioned Raft KV</a> architecture, as part of the near-term GA of the architecture.
```

| TiKV | [`rocksdb.stats-dump-period`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#stats-dump-period) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to disable redundant log printing, changes the default value from `"10m"` to `"0"`. |
| TiKV | [`storage.block-cache.capacity`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#capacity) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to compensate for the memory overhead of memtables, TiKV changes the default value from 45% to 30% of the size of total system memory. |
| TiKV | [`rocksdb.write-buffer-limit`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#write-buffer-limit-new-in-v660) | Modified | To reduce the memory overhead of memtables, when `storage.engine="raft-kv"`, TiKV changes the default value from 25% of the memory of the machine to `0`, which means no limit. When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), TiKV changes the default value from 25% to 20% of the memory of the machine. |

> | TiKV | [`rocksdb.lockcf.write-buffer-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#write-buffer-size) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to speed up compaction on lockcf, TiKV changes the default value from `"32MB"` to `"4MB"`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`rocksdb.lockcf.write-buffer-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#write-buffer-size) | Modified | When using Partitioned Raft KV (`storage.engine="partitioned-raft-kv"`), to speed up compaction on lockcf, TiKV changes the default value from `"32MB"` to `"4MB"`. |
| TiFlash | [`storage.format_version`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) | Modified | Introduces a new DTFile format `format_version = 5`（not the default format for v7.3.0). This format can reduces the number of physical files by merging smaller files. Note that this format is experimental and not recommended to be used in a production environment.  |
```

    - Optimize the performance of reading the dumped chunks from disk [#45125](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/45125) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)

+ TiKV

    <!-- Oreoxmt -->
    - Add the `Max gap of safe-ts` and `Min safe ts region` metrics and introduce the `tikv-ctl get_region_read_progress` command to better observe and diagnose the status of resolved-ts and safe-ts [#15082](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/15082) [@ekexium](https://github.com/ekexium)

+ PD

    <!-- qiancai -->
    - Support blocking the Swagger API by default when the Swagger server is not enabled [#6786](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6786) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies)
    - Improve the high availability of etcd [#6554](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6554) [#6442](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6442) @[lhy1024](https://github.com/lhy1024)
    - Reduce the memory consumption of `GetRegions` requests [#6835](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/6835) @[lhy1024](https://github.com/lhy1024)

+ TiFlash

    <!-- qiancai -->

>     - Support a new DTFile format version to reduce the number of physical files (experimental) [#7595](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7595) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Support a new DTFile format version [`storage.format_version = 5`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md) to reduce the number of physical files (experimental) [#7595](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/7595) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)
```
